- If you think that Leviathan is a fire-breathing dinosaur, you're missing out on SOOOO much of what the Bible has to offer. Leviathan has nothing to do with dinosaurs; it is so much more interesting than that.
○ Cut to clip of me saying that's why it is so important to understand Leviathan is not a dinosaur
-  In fact, by the end of this video, you will be shocked at how much scriptures reference Leviathan from genesis to the major prophets to the minor prophets to psalms to the gospels to Revelation, Leviathan is everywhere, and you have probably never been told where to look.
○ And unlike most videos about Leviathan on the internet, this isn't going to be full of filler with dramatic narrations and long pauses for suspense. We actually have a ton of meat to dig into and many of Biblical passages to explore, so let's dig into it.
- When people think about Leviathan in scripture, they usually only think of one passage at the end of Job.
○ The passage describes in great detail Leviathan as a massive sea beast with scales and fire for breath. It is impossible to tame and extremely deadly.
- As this video will explain, I don't believe Leviathan is a literal member of the animal kingdom, however, there are generally two reasons why Christians suppose Leviathan must be literal.
○ The first is that he and behemoth are described at the end of a list of literal creatures
§ This isn't too convincing of an argument  since Job is a highly poetic book in general. It describes lightning as coming from storehouses among other highly metaphorical things. If the author wanted to cap off his list with a metaphorical dragon figure like Leviathan, he could certainly do so.
§ Also, there is actually a gap in the text between the list of real animals and the mention of Behemoth and Leviathan. It is clear that the author is singling these two as a different category from the rest of the creatures mentioned by God.
○ The second argument for a literal view is that the description is too detailed to be describing a metaphor.
§ The obvious problem with this argument is that there are no limits to how detailed a metaphor can be. Ezekiel 16 and Revelation 17 both contain metaphors that are significantly longer than that of Job 41. Yet, they are still metaphors.
§ Secondly, lengthy descriptions of Leviathan are not there to help describe in literal terms what Leviathan is. They are there for dramatic effect. This is clear in the fact that the passage frequently mentions multiple details that together actually only communicate one singular thing.
□ For example verses 1-5 present a number of questions about what Job can do, but in reality they are all one question. Can you, Job, tame Leviathan? The reason it splits this one question into 5 different questions that are all essentially the same question is for dramatic emphasis. This is very common in Hebrew poetry. These details are clearly here to beat into Job's brain how terrifying and unstoppable Leviathan is. Similarly, carefully study the text, and you will realize that all of the so-called detailed descriptions are really there to emphasize a small handful of facts.
- With those two arguments out of the way, are there any reasons we should understand Leviathan to be a metaphor?
- Let's start with Psalm 74, which describes the creation of the world.
○ Psalm 74:12-14: Yet God my King is from of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth. You divided the sea by your might; you broke the heads of the sea monsters on the waters. You crushed the heads of Leviathan; you gave him as food for the creatures of the wilderness.
§ It seems here that Leviathan has multiple heads. What a strange description if Leviathan is supposed to be a dinosaur.
- Yet, before we fully break down Psalm 74, I want you to see Isaiah's mini apocalypse, starting in chapter 26, verse 20:
Come, my people, enter your chambers,
    and shut your doors behind you;
hide yourselves for a little while
    until the fury has passed by.
21
For behold, the Lord is coming out from his place
    to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity,
and the earth will disclose the blood shed on it,
    and will no more cover its slain.
In that day the Lord with his hard and great and strong sword will punish Leviathan the fleeing serpent, Leviathan the twisting serpent, and he will slay the dragon that is in the sea.
§ I started in chapter 26 to make it absolutely clear that this is about the day of the Lord, when Jesus returns to judge all of the nations and destroy all of his enemies. It is in that day that He will slay the great sea dragon, Leviathan. How strange that God would do this if Leviathan is just a dinosaur. Besides which, there aren't any dinosaurs anymore, so where is Jesus going to find one to kill at His parousia?
§ Now, I want you to take a look at this verse again and compare it with a pagan text found in the nearby location of Ugarit:
□ KTU 1.5:I:2 When you smote Litanu, the fleeing serpent, annihilated the twisting serpent the dominant one who has seven heads…
§ According to Ben Stanhope, the consonants that form the word Litanu, are contained in the Hebrew consonants for Leviathan. This most likely means that Leviathan and Litanu are variations on the same name, but in different languages.
□ Beyond having the same name, both Litanu and Leviathan are described as having multiple heads, 7 heads in fact. And while we are on the subject of 7 headed mythical chaos dragons that come from the sea, can you think of any other text that describes a 7 headed beast? Just a hint of where this video is going.
□ Additionally, Ola Wikander argues that the words "fleeing" and "twisting" are so rare in both Hebrew and Ugaritic, that both words appearing in each text by chance is unthinkable. Isaiah 27 is clearly borrowing elements from the earlier Ugarit text, as is well known in Biblical scholarship. Yet, Isaiah is not the only Biblical author that references the fleeing serpent Litanu. In fact, this requires to go back to Job, but this time in chapter 26.
By his power he stilled the sea;
    by his understanding he shattered Rahab.
By his wind the heavens were made fair;
    his hand pierced the fleeing serpent.
□ Job 26 uses the alternative Biblical name for Leviathan: Rahab. Just like the Isaiah text, this references the fleeing serpent from the Ugaritic myth. This is important because it proves that just like the authors of Psalm 74 and Isaiah, the author of Job was aware that Leviathan had multiple heads. And just like Psalm 74, Job mentions the crushing of Leviathan in the context of describing the creation of the world.
- Do you know of any serpentine water dinosaur with multiple heads? It’s at this point where some colorful individuals will still argue that, despite having never dug up a multi-headed dinosaur before, maybe God could create such a creature literally. After all, He's God, so why couldn't He literally create a dinosaur with 7 heads that breathes fire? My response is that psalm 91 says God will cover you with his feathery wings. Why shouldn't we take it as literal? He's God, if He wants to conjure up giant feathery wings to literally cover us, why couldn't He?
○ But that's clearly not supposed to be taken literally you say. But why should it not be taken literally?
○ Well, because it's obvious that God doesn't have gigantic feathery wings, that would be crazy you say? But is that any more crazy than taking a 7-headed serpentine, fire-breathing water dragon that was slain in order for God to create the world as literal? The feathery wings crosses the line, but that doesn’t? Who defines what's too outlandish to take literally? By what standard do you say feathery wings are too outlandish to be literal, yet fire-breathing multi-headed dragons are totally normal.
○ But maybe you say, well the feathery wings text is in psalms, which is full of poetry. Yet, the book of Job is also clearly poetry. By what standard do you say Leviathan is literal, yet feathery wings are not? Or do you just secretly really hope Leviathan is a dinosaur and so you pick and choose your method of interpretation to get your desired outcome?
○ Consider Isaiah 60:16, which says "you shall nurse at the breast of kings". Should we take this as literal? I mean, if God wanted to fulfil this literally, could He not do so? Who are you to answer back to God and say He couldn't literally make the Israelites suck on the breasts of kings? After all, that's what the passage says, and I believe it.
§ Of course I'm being silly because the question is not could God have people suck the breasts of kings or could God create feathery wings to cover us. It's not could God create a 7-headed fire-breathing water dragon. The only question that matters  is did God actually wish to convey these things, or did He wish to convey something else? Did God wish to convey that Leviathan literally exists, or did He wish to convey something else? Therefore, the question "could God?" is a waste of time; the real question is "did God?".
- So how then can we know if Leviathan is actually a dinosaur or something else? The same way we understand any other concept in scripture. We read about Leviathan in each of the contexts in which he is mentioned and we see what is the most uniform way of understanding Leviathan. So far, we have only looked at four texts in scripture about Leviathan, yet each of them raises serious problems for the literal interpretation.
○ Job 41 describes Leviathan as fire-breathing. At the very least this is odd and clues us in that things are not purely literal.
○ Psalm 74 and Job 26 say Leviathan was killed in order to create the world. Why would God need to slaughter a poor plesiosaur as an act of creation? They also say or imply in the case of Job 26 that it has multiple heads, which pretty much rules out every dinosaur I have ever heard of.
§ Also, have you noticed that every single reference to Leviathan or Rahab is singular? The Bible has no concept of multiple Leviathans. This is because Biblically speaking, Leviathan is not seen as a species of animal, but as an entity. Take a look at Job 9:
God will not turn back his anger;
    beneath him bowed the helpers of Rahab
□ So apparently there are helpers of Rahab, singular. If Rahab means a members of the Rahab species in such a way that there are multiple Rahabs, then why are there only helpers of one singular Rahab. And for that matter, why would a plesiosaur need helpers. This just doesn't make sense.
○ The dinosaur view also doesn't make sense of Isaiah 27, which says that this same Leviathan who God apparently killed as an act of creation, will be killed again at the end of days. Why would God kill a Mosasaur when Jesus returns? Again, this is definitely odd if taken literally just as it would be odd for Israelites to literally suck on king's nipples to fulfill Isaiah 60. It's possible, but not likely.
- So if Leviathan isn't a dinosaur, what exactly is he? I have mentioned that Leviathan is not exactly a literal beast, but what is he then? Leviathan is the ancient world's personification of chaos, evil, and destruction in the world.
○ Notice that Job uses poetic language to communicate that Leviathan is 1) destructive, 2) undefeatable, and 3) untamable. What is more destructive, undefeatable and untamable than pure chaos itself? An example would be a hurricane. That's something that could strike whenever it wants to, it is highly destructive, and there is nothing we can do to tame it or destroy it. The hurricane just does what it wants. What about a tsunami or a famine? Either one of those could end you and even your entire village, and there's nothing you can do about it. Even another tribe of savage raiders coming down to rape the women, slaughter the men, and steal the food count as agents of chaos.
§ Society was always surrounded by the chaos of both man and nature, and any cataclysm could cause the waters of chaos to destroy the meager patch of order that there was. You never knew if there would be a drought, a plague of locusts, or an invading army to kill you and those you love. You see, if Leviathan represents Chaos and calamity, then all of these things ARE leviathan. And therefore, chaos fits perfectly in Job, where this literal view does not.
○ But what about Psalm 74 and Job 26? Well, if Leviathan is a metaphor for chaos in the world, then it makes sense that God would have to defeat chaos in order to create an ordered world for humanity to dwell. Psalms and Job use the chaos entity of Rahab to describe how God subdued chaos in the beginning.
§ Additionally, God killing a supernatural watery chaos dragon in order to create the world is a common motif in ancient literature. It would be just as easily recognized as Santa Clause in our culture. Consider the story of Tiamat. Depending on which version of the story you read, Enlil or Marduk of the Babylonians was said to have slaughtered the great serpentine sea dragon Tiamat by crushing her skull, much like in psalm 74 and Job 26. Just like Leviathan, Tiamat represents the primordial waters of Chaos out of which the world was formed. In fact, after his victory, Marduk cut Tiamat in half to create both heaven and earth.
□ Yet, Tiamat is not the only ancient example of a heroic God slaying a mythological representative of chaos. From the previously mentioned Litanu who was slain by the hero of the canaanites, baal, to the god Yam who was defeated by Baal to attain supremacy among the gods, to Apophis, the Egyptian serpentine God of chaos and destruction who battled Ra every morning.
□ These types of stories pop up so often in the ancient world that scholars have developed a term for them: chaoskamf. We can even see where these ideas spread to Greco-Roman religion with the idea of a hydra: a mythological multiheaded-serpentine dragon that must be slain by the hero Heracles. Chaoskamf myths we pretty much universal in these cultures, and even, where Leviathan isn't directly referenced in chaoskamf myths, the sea itself often is.
□ Consider the opening chapter of Genesis, where God cuts the waters in half in order to create heaven and earth. As it is written, "And God made the firmament and separated the waters that were under the expanse from the waters that were above the expanse"
® Of course, the difference between the Babylonian and Biblical account is that the Genesis portrays God as the uncontested being in control the whole time, whereas in the Babylonian version, it seems quite unsure whether Marduk will end up defeating the great sea dragon. In fact, according to Genesis, in the beginning, God was already hovering over the surface of the deep. The Hebrew word for deep is Tehom, which many scholars believe is a variation on the name Tiamat, thus making the connection even stronger.
□ According to Genesis 1, God took the waters underneath the firmament and created the dry land in the midst of them. Thus, just like the Babylonian account of Tiamat, and the creation narrative in Psalm 74, God created the world by cutting chaos in half and forming order in the midst of it.
® Thus, while I wish to dwell on Genesis further, suffice to say the creation account is not about literal science and geography. It is about how God split the waters of Chaos in two in order to create His own ordered Sacred space in the midst of it, centered at Eden.
® Also, can you think of any other time God split water in two in order to establish another sacred space?
® Now if you love the Bible, this is where things are about to get really cool. After having victory over the less powerful gods of Egypt, YHWH led His people to the sea, where He split the waters in two, just like He did in Genesis. Even we see this as an amazing miracle, but for the ancient audience, this was much more. This was God defeating Leviathan again and splitting the waters of chaos again, just like He did in Genesis. Only, instead of splitting them vertically, He split the red Sea horizontally, providing a highway of salvation for His people to enter the new Eden full of milk and honey. And btw this idea of a highway is picked up in prophets like Isaiah to describe the prophesied salvation that we find in Jesus.
® For the Israelites, this wasn't just a cool miracle, this was new creation. It was just as significant as God creating the universe because He was again crushing Leviathan, the watery embodiment of chaos. The Exodus was no less significance than the creation of the world because they both involved salvation from Leviathan.
® If I am correct about the metaphorical interpretation of Leviathan, then he was indeed crushed when the waters of the Red Sea were split. But you don't have to take my word for it, consider Isaiah 51:
Awake, awake, arm of the Lord,
    clothe yourself with strength!
Awake, as in days gone by,
    as in generations of old.
Was it not you who cut Rahab to pieces,
    who pierced that monster through?
10
Was it not you who dried up the sea,
    the waters of the great deep,
who made a road in the depths of the sea
    so that the redeemed might cross over?
11
Those the Lord has rescued will return.
    They will enter Zion with singing;
    everlasting joy will crown their heads.
Gladness and joy will overtake them,
    and sorrow and sighing will flee away.
® As we have seen in Job, Rahab is another name for Leviathan. In this case, Isaiah associates the splitting of the red sea to be the piercing through of Leviathan. Rahab isn't just a dinosaur in the sea, Leviathan IS the sea. Yet Isaiah cleverly draws on Leviathan and new creation themes to prophesy about the redeemed returning to Zion, which is to be fulfilled in Jesus. All of these things are connected because scripture is one beautiful story.
◊ Psalm 89 likewise attributes the crushing of Rahab to YHWH, although it is unclear whether it is referring to Genesis or Exodus.
○ Yet even so, chaos still exists in the world. Yes, God did form order in the midst of it in Genesis, but we are surrounded above and below by danger from every side. There are still hurricanes, tsunamis, and cancer. There is still darkness that can overwhelm each of us at any moment. But there will be a day when God doesn't just have order in the midst of chaos, but destroys Leviathan completely. In that day, there will be no sea, and death will be no more because Leviathan has been defeated and permanently destroyed. If you love eschatology then the destruction of the sea itself is probably already sparking connections in your mind.
§ That is what Isaiah 27 is all about. That's why it is so natural for Isaiah to think of God's miraculous destruction of chaos as the killing of Leviathan. Because for Isaiah and the entire ancient world, Leviathan is the personification of chaos. And that's why God must kill him on the last day. As Christians, we know that this happens at Jesus' return. This is when God completes the New Creation that He started in the Exodus by forming a New Heavens and Earth.
- But if Leviathan simply represents chaos, then it makes sense that he would be portrayed as a destructive monster, but why a SEA monster? Why is he associated with water, and why do other cultures use sea monsters like Tiamat and Litanu to represent disorder? To answer this, let me use an illustration.
○ Imagine sitting on a boat in the middle of the ocean. You look down, and all you see is endless water. It's kind of like when you were afraid of dark when you were little because anything could be there. In the water, you don't know if there is a shark below you or even something else more sinister. All you see is blue on all sides, and if anything happens to your boat, you're screwed.
§ This is why, especially for the ancients, the sea was seen as other worldly. Humans can't live there; we can't survive there without boats. As Mike Heiser puts it…
§ This is why, in the ancient world, the ocean was seen as the representation of chaos, destruction, evil, and death. In fact, many texts use the sea as a way of talking about the realm of the dead. For example, Ezekiel in prophesying about the doom of those in Tyre uses the sea to describe where they will end up as they die. Other prophets do this as well because the sea was another way of describing Sheol or the place where people go when they die.
○ The perfect example of this is the story of Jonah. Here Jonah is stuck on a boat in the middle of the ocean, when the sea is thrown into turmoil. Each man prays to his god in hopes that they can be delivered from the great storm. Yet, none of these false gods can deliver them from the certain doom of the sea- both the literal sea and the sea as in the realm of the dead. They are doomed, while Jonah is fast asleep in the inner part of the ship.
§ Eventually, Jonah admits that the storm is a result of his flight from YHWH and tells the men to throw him overboard. The men tried to row back to dry land, but eventually did indeed throw him overboard, causing the sea to quiet down. Interestingly, this filled the men with great fear towards YHWH because He was the only god who demonstrated the ability to calm the sea of chaos. Just like Job 41 illustrates, YHWH alone is able to tame Leviathan.
§ The story of Jonah is the perfect illustration of Leviathan. In the storm, the men were surrounded by death in the realm of the dead, namely the sea. In very real terms, they were under attack by Leviathan. Yet, even so, Leviathan was merely doing the bidding of YHWH to accomplish His plan. And there's an important lesson here that when the storms of life come against us, we know that Leviathan is on a leash. Chaos can only do what God allows it to do.
§ However, there is much more to the story of Jonah than you have likely heard in Sunday school. For example, we have recovered Jewish Midrash traditions that claim that the fish that swallowed Jonah actually was a Leviathan. While these texts postdate Jonah by over a thousand years, it is interesting that some commentators went in the Leviathan direction. Based on what we know about Leviathan, it would be quite natural to place such a character in the story of Jonah.
§ However, what's even more interesting is that many early Christian paintings and sculptures tend to describe the fish that swallows Jonah as a serpentine dragon. As you can see, these pictures of the fish are very reminiscent of Leviathan. Yet, the Hebrew text of Jonah itself simply uses the ordinary word for fish, so what's causing all of these artists to think of the fish as a sea dragon? What are ancient Christians seeing in the story of Jonah that modern Christians don't notice?
§ Well, one possible influence on early Christians is likely the Septuagint. The Septuagint is just the Greek version of the original Hebrew Old Testament. It's the version that early Christians would have read, and it uses a very interesting Greek word for the fish in Jonah.
§ When translating the word Hebrew word dag, meaning fish, into Greek, the Septuagint uses the word of Icthis, meaning fish, every single time… until we get to the story of Jonah. When translating this same word dag in the Jonah story, the Septuagint renders it as κῆτος. And Ketos actually means "sea monster". As Dr Scott Noegel points out in his article titled "Jonah and Leviathan: Inner Biblical Allusions and the Problem with Dragons",
□ "Early Christian depictions of Jonah’s “fish” as a sea dragon have long posed a problem for scholars. Some have explained it by pointing to the Septuagint’s rendering of Jonah’s “fish” as a κῆτος (kētos),“sea creature.” Yet this translation is itself problematic since it is completely out of step with treatments of the term ג ָּד) dag) “fish” elsewhere in the Bible."
□ Dr Noegel goes on to list a number of internal clues in the book of Jonah that indicate Leviathan imagery.
® Firstly, when the read literally, the text actually says the wind was in the sea, not on the sea. As if the waves were actually caused by a beast like Leviathan in Job 41.
® Secondly, Noegel brings a strong case that Jonah uses a specific rare Hebrew word in chapter 1, verse 13 to reference Amos 9:2. And the context of Amos 9 mentions the realm of the dead, paralleled with the sea of Jonah, along with a reference to a serpentine dragon.
® Thirdly, Noegel points out that Jonah 2 uses a number of words that specifically point to Leviathan passages. For example he points out that Metsula or deep is always used in connection with either Leviathan or the Exodus, which itself is associated with Leviathan.
® Additionally, chapter 2 describes Jonah as living in the belly of Sheol as if Sheol is itself a beast that has an insatiable appetite to consume. In fact, the prayer of Jonah is filled with cosmic descriptions of the Sea as the metaphorical realm of the dead that has swallowed up Jonah.
® However, what's most interesting is that verse 3 says "
For you cast me into the deep,
    into the heart of the seas,
    and the NAHAR surrounded me;
® Commenting on Nahar in this text, Noegel writes: "The term most often refers generally to a “river,” “stream,” or “canal,” or to a specific river, such as the Nile or Euphrates (Gen 15:18). However, when used synonymously with the deep (Isa 44:27, Ezek 31:4, 31:15, 32:2) and the sea (Isa 50:2, Nah 1:4, Hab 3:8, Ps 24:2, 74:15) , it refers to the cosmological waters that Yahweh rebukes and/or cleaves. Even when used figuratively, רָּהָנ does not mean “flood,” but rather “stream” (Job 20:17). Thus, its appearance immediately after the word יםימ yammim “seas” emits cosmological reverberations, and recalls the age-old identification of the river with Leviathan, as attested in Ugaritic texts in the creature’s other name…"
® Dr Mike Heiser actually pics up on the use of Nahar by pointing out that it actually is a word that can itself mean snake.
◊ Heiser clip
□ So what do we have in Jonah? Well, Jonah was probably swallowed by something like a whale, but then the writer, as he is retelling the story chooses to surround the story with metaphorical descriptions of the Sheol, the waters of Chaos, and a number of allusions to Leviathan. And what the author of Jonah is expecting is that you will sort of pick up a number of these clues and realize what's going on. And people did realize what was going on, that’s why the Septuagint translates the fish as Sea monster, and that's why Jews and Christians considered the fish to be a dragon.
® However, whether or not the fish of Jonah is a Leviathan, what it clear is that the STORY of Jonah is definitely about Leviathan.
○ And we can't talk about Jonah without mentioning the greater Jonah. Just look at how much more this adds to Jesus' claim that Jonah was a sign of His own death and resurrection. You see, looking at the story through ancient eyes, Jonah isn't just a cool story of someone getting stuck in a fish for a few days. It's about Jonah descending into belly of the beast of Sheol, it's about him falling into the realm of death, the very waters of chaos that overtakes all of us eventually. It's about Jonah being swallowed by Leviathan, but eventually being resurrected out of the belly of death incarnate to go and deliver the message of salvation to the gentiles. And by the way, Jonah volunteered to descend to hell in order to save a ship full of pagan sinners from Leviathan.
§ Jesus is really saying that He too will descend into the belly of Leviathan, but will return from realm of the dead with the keys of Hades in hand. This was deeply significant and thick imagery. Just as significant as Jesus finding Himself asleep on a boat in a storm just like Jonah. Only Jesus proves that He is able to walk all over Leviathan and even calm the sea and the storm, showing that He is indeed God.
§ Just as God tamed Leviathan by calming the storm in Jonah, Jesus does the same, fulfilling the role that only God can have according to Job 41. In fact, just like the exodus Jesus comes to kill Leviathan by entering His own belly and splitting him in two to form a highway for sinners to cross from Sheol to a New Eden and a New Jerusalem.
□ And that's why if you are still stuck on Leviathan being a dinosaur, then you aren't going to get any of that. You won't get what the whole story is about because you don't understand who Leviathan is and how Jesus is going to defeat him.
§ Jesus isn't done with Leviathan. According to 1 Corinthians 15, right when Jesus comes back and raptures His church, then He will ultimately slay the last enemy, which is Leviathan. This is exactly like what we have already read in Isaiah 27 and what we will eventually read in Revelation. And let me tell you, Revelation's use of Leviathan is absolutely incredible.
§ However, we STILL don't have all we need to fully unpack Leviathan imagery in Revelation. Did I not warn you that the Bible talks about Leviathan a ton? You see, there is still one more piece of the puzzle we need, and to find that, we need to go to the book of Ezekiel.
- Ezekiel… (Ezekiel 29-30)
○ Ezekiel 29 contains a prophecy against the nation of Egypt, and in it God actually describes Egypt as a dragon that lies in the midst of his streams. By now, based on all we have learned, Leviathan instantly now comes to mind for us as it would have for the original audience. God promises to put hooks in Egypt's jaws and throw him out into the desert where he will be eaten by the birds and beasts.
§ So here, we have a number of interesting things to note.
1) A nation of people can be described as Leviathan. This is very interesting because it proves that Leviathan is not just natural chaos such as wildfires, tsunamis, hurricanes, and famines. Yes, these things are Leviathan, but Leviathan is also people and nations. In a Biblical worldview, when people align themselves against the true God and His people, they actually join on the side of Leviathan and become agents of chaos themselves. Therefore, earthly battles are not just physical, but there are cosmic, spiritual forces at work, and the real question is who's side are you on?
a) Are you on the side of chaos and evil, or are you on the side of God?
b) Even in the story of Jonah, Noegel argues that Leviathan-type language is even applied to Jonah himself when he runs away from God's plan for his life. So in Jonah, we see that even when believers sin and disobey God, we are actually supporting Leviathan. When we aren't serving God, we are serving Satan.
c) However, in Ezekiel 28, the referent isn't an individual, but an entire nation that is working on behalf of evil.
2) The second thing to note about Ezekiel 29 is that we find that Egypt is described as a dragon that is lying down and no doing anything. To see why this description makes sense, we need to know a little bit of Biblical history. When Babylon became a threat and started to become a threat to the kingdom of Judah, the Jews made covenants with Egypt to protect them from Babylon. This was very much against the command of YHWH who insisted that Judah rely on Him rather than the pagans. However, even so, God expected Egypt to fulfill their promise to protect Israel.
a) Yet, when the time came, Egypt ended up doing nothing about the Babylonian invasion. Therefore, just like Jonah, by not doing what they were supposed to do, they ended up becoming an agent of chaos. Yet, they were a lazy, inept agent, which is why they are described as lying down. Therefore, God accuses them of breaking trust when Israel leaned on them.
b) Isaiah 30 also echos this sentiment by saying (30:7): "Egypt's help is worthless and empty; therefore I have called her “Rahab who sits still.”
c) Again, Rahab is another name for Leviathan, so it is clear that the dragon of Ezekiel is not just some other dragon, it is definitely Leviathan the chaos dragon.
3) Thirdly, notice that Leviathan is thrown into the wilderness. It hardly makes sense if this is literal that a sea creature would be thrown in the desert. However, if you are thinking more symbolically, then it makes perfect sense. The desert is a place of death, where survival is difficult. The desert is the realm of Satan and is the opposite of Eden, which was a garden. God is saying that He will throw Leviathan, who is Egypt, to the place of death to die.
4) Lastly, pay attention to the idea that all the beasts and birds feed on  Leviathan. This is common imagery for divine punishment of Leviathan, which we have already seen in psalm 74. Also note again that psalm 74 has Leviathan cast into the wilderness like Ezekiel 28.
§ The big picture of Ezekiel 29 is that the nation of when a nation aligns itself with Leviathan, they will be severely punished by God. And according to Jermiah, sometimes God uses the sea itself to destroy Leviathan:
How Babylon[e] is taken,
    the praise of the whole earth seized!
How Babylon has become
    a horror among the nations!
42 The sea has come up on Babylon;
    she is covered with its tumultuous waves.
43 Her cities have become a horror,
    a land of drought and a desert,
a land in which no one dwells,
    and through which no son of man passes.
44 And I will punish Bel in Babylon,
    and take out of his mouth what he has swallowed.
The nations shall no longer flow to him;
    the wall of Babylon has fallen.
§ Here, Babylon, the Leviathan who has swallowed nations will be destroyed by God using the sea. Because of our discussion of Jonah, we know that the sea represents chaos and death. Yet those whom Babylon has killed will actually extracted from the realm of the dead. God is promising resurrection out of the mouth of Leviathan while killing Leviathan with his own sea.
□ Again, this is just like Isaiah 27 where death is defeated at the same time as Leviathan is destroyed. Yet now, based on Ezekiel and Jeremiah, we know that the defeat of Leviathan isn't just the ending of hurricanes. It's also the destruction of those people who are on the side of Leviathan. When Jesus' returns He will kill the serpent and all those who are part of it.
○ Later in Ezekiel 32, we again see Pharaoh and Egypt called a dragon, yet God is going to fling Leviathan onto the ground and drench the land with his carcass. And again, we see the common imagery of birds and beasts eating the flesh of Leviathan.
- However, the most interesting passage about Leviathan in Ezekiel is in chapters 38 and 39. This is the famous Gog of Magog passage where we hear about this great enemy of God's people. According to Revelation 20, we know that the battle of Gog and Magog occurs at the end of the millennium, which gives us a solid anchor point about when exactly this passage is going to be fulfilled. 
○ In chapter 38, we read that God will put hooks in the jaws of Gog to lure him out to battle. This language of hooks in jaws is clear Leviathan imagery since Ezekiel himself used it earlier to describe the defeat of Egypt as Leviathan. However, now in the end times, Gog, the ultimate representative of Leviathan will be drawn out from the sea of chaos where he resides to ultimately be slain.
○ Therefore Gog comes out from his place to attack the people of God, where He is killed on the mountains of Israel. Then, to confirm the Leviathan imagery, Ezekiel provides an extended description of the ultimate End-times Leviathan being eaten by the birds of the air.
"As for you, son of man, thus says the Lord God: Speak to the birds of every sort and to all beasts of the field: ‘Assemble and come, gather from all around to the sacrificial feast that I am preparing for you, a great sacrificial feast on the mountains of Israel, and you shall eat flesh and drink blood.18 You shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the earth—of rams, of lambs, and of he-goats, of bulls, all of them fat beasts of Bashan.19 And you shall eat fat till you are filled, and drink blood till you are drunk, at the sacrificial feast that I am preparing for you.20 And you shall be filled at my table with horses and charioteers, with mighty men and all kinds of warriors,’ declares the Lord God."
○ We know this language applies to Leviathan because the feasting of birds and beasts on Leviathan's flesh has been repeated multiple times in in Ezekiel and elsewhere. This is why, if you don't understand what Leviathan imagery looks like and what Leviathan represents, you will completely miss what Ezekiel is doing. He is purposefully presenting Gog as the last battle of Leviathan vs YHWH. And as Isaiah 27 tells us, this happens on the day of the Lord and return of Jesus.
- And this brings us to Revelation 19, where we find the fulfillment of Ezekiel 38 and 39.
○ Rev 19:15,17-21
From his mouth comes a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations, and he will rule[c] them with a rod of iron. He will tread the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty.
17 Then I saw an angel standing in the sun, and with a loud voice he called to all the birds that fly directly overhead, “Come, gather for the great supper of God,18 to eat the flesh of kings, the flesh of captains, the flesh of mighty men, the flesh of horses and their riders, and the flesh of all men, both free and slave,[d] both small and great.”19 And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth with their armies gathered to make war against him who was sitting on the horse and against his army.20 And the beast was captured, and with it the false prophet who in its presence[e] had done the signs by which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those who worshiped its image. These two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur.21 And the rest were slain by the sword that came from the mouth of him who was sitting on the horse, and all the birds were gorged with their flesh.
○ The similarities of this text and Ezekiel 39 are abundant. John is obviously portraying Jesus' return on a white horse to defeat Leviathan as the fulfillment of Gog and Magog.
§ But wait a minute, you may be thinking . Doesn't the Gog/Magog battle happen at the end of the millennium, not the beginning? And with this, you would be correct. However, it is indeed fulfilled at the return of Jesus. This means that according to the book of Revelation, the end of the millennium and the return of Jesus are the same event. The only conclusion that we can draw then is that we are currently in the millennium and are awaiting Jesus to return and destroy Gog.
§ But aside from the millennium debate, now that we understand Leviathan imagery in Ezekiel, we can properly understand how John parallels the language of birds feasting in order to portray Jesus' coming as the destruction of Leviathan, the great enemy.
- John actually introduced Leviathan way back in Revelation 12. Here we read about a 7-headed dragon that is also identified as a serpent. Hmmm. Now can you think of where we may have heard about 7-headed serpentine dragons? That's what Leviathan is, and John is using this to clearly apply Leviathan imagery to Satan.
○ This of course raises the question, is Leviathan just another name for Satan? One could be forgiven for thinking that Satan and Leviathan are the same things since both are described as dragons, both are described as serpents, both are on the same side, both are associated with chaos and death, and both feature in Revelation and Genesis.
§ However, there are a number of reasons to think that Satan and Leviathan aren't actually identical. Firstly, we have already seen that Leviathan is often made up of people or nations such as Egypt and Babylon. Satan is an individual entity who is not comprised of people. Additionally, Satan may or may not be able to cause natural disasters, but we cannot say that these natural disasters ARE Satan in the sense that we can With Leviathan. Lastly, there is nothing in chapter 12 to say that Satan lives in the sea like Leviathan.
□ Nevertheless, Satan is the greatest agent of chaos, which is why from the beginning he has been associated with Leviathan, and it is why Leviathan imagery is applied to Satan here.
- Of course, the biggest reason we know that Satan is not Leviathan is that Leviathan imagery is also shared with the first beast. Notice how Satan stands at the sea in order to beckon to another 7-headed sea monster to rise up. So the idea here is clear. Both Satan and the first beast are indeed Leviathan because together, they represent the forces of evil and chaos in the world.
○ Borrowing on the symbolism of Daniel 7, Revelation 13 describes the beast as a combination of a bear, lion, and leopard. However, even though it has fur, it is still obvious that this is Leviathan. The beast still comes out of the sea and has 7 heads like Leviathan, yet it is also clearly meant to parallel the description of Satan who does look like a dragon. Yet Satan does not share the water dwelling aspect like the beast.
§ It seems the idea here is that Satan does not embody all of the attributes of Leviathan because Leviathan is more than just Satan. Likewise, the beast does not have all the attributes of Leviathan because Leviathan is more than just this beast. However, together, they comprise Leviathan.
○ Now as far as the land beast in Revelation 13, my view is that he is the embodiment of Behemoth in Job 41. And since we haven't gone into the identity of Behemoth, I will save the false prophet for a future video. However, just note that the second beast speaks like a dragon, clearly identifying him as being on the side of Leviathan the dragon.
○ As far as the lion, bear, and leopard imagery, these descriptions are clearly taken from Daniel 7, where the lion represents the Babylonian empire, the bear represents the Medo-Persian empire, and the leopard represents the Greek empire. In Daniel, each beast is an empire, and also according to Daniel, each empire comes out of the sea.
§ Now remember, the sea represents the chaotic forces of anti-Eden where there is only death and destruction. So even in the original Daniel passage, we at least see that Leviathan motifs are present.
§ Now returning again to Revelation, and this helps us understand that the first beast is sort of an amalgamation of all of the previous incarnations of Leviathan. Just as Egypt was considered Leviathan by Ezekiel, Daniel considers each beast to be another form of THE beast. And in Revelation, this leads to one of two possibilities.
§ Either the beast is a singular empire that embodies the satanic aspects of each of the empires of Daniel OR this beast represents all evil empires that oppose the church between Christ's first and second coming.
□ Either way, it is clear that the beast represents an empire or multiple empires, not a singular antichrist figure. Of course there may be a man who is an emperor figure at the head of this beast, but he himself is not the beast. Much like Pharoah is associated with Leviathan, but it is really all of Egypt who are Leviathan in Ezekiel 32. Or how in Ezekiel 38, Gog is the chief prince of Leviathan, but it is all of Gog's hordes that really embody who Leviathan is.
□ Of course, the parallels between the antichrist and Gog are so apparent, that both are almost certainly the same person. Both are the head of a Leviathan empire that is destroyed when Jesus returns in chapter 19. Again, this is why Jesus' return signals the end of the millennium.
□ In fact, the millennium makes absolutely no sense of what scripture says about Leviathan. When Jesus returns, is He going to kill Leviathan or isn't He? Is Isaiah 27 going to be fulfilled, or isn't it? Is Gog and all the hordes of chaos going to be destroyed, or aren't they? Will Satan be ultimately defeated or won't he? Is Jesus going to defeat the last enemy that is death when He returns, or isn't He?
® The millennium just throws an obtuse wrench in God's beautiful story.
- Revelation (the sea gave up the dead in it)
○ And speaking of the end of the millennium, consider what we read just after Satan is finally destroyed.
Rev 20:13: And the sea gave up the dead who were in it, Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them, and they were judged, each one of them, according to what they had done.
○ Richard Baucham goes into this text in great detail in his book The Climax of Prophecy and shows that John is drawing from a known apocalyptic tradition where the realm of the dead is called to return those who have been entrusted to it. He argues that the sea in this verse doesn't just refer to people who happened to have dies offshore, but rather the sea is another term for the cosmological waters of chaos that represent the realm of the dead.
§ This is very much in line with the way Jonah considers himself in the belly of hades when he is in the midst of the sea.
§ Verse 13 also strongly resembles what we read in Jeremiah 51, where God promises to raise those who have been swallowed by Marduk and Babylon.
○ And not only are the dead taken from Leviathan, but Leviathan and death itself are ultimately destroyed, which is why verse 14 says:
§ Then Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire.
○ And then immediately in chapter 21, we read:
Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more.
○ Some people find it strange that there is no sea anymore, but I'm hoping this now makes perfect sense to you. This isn't talking about the oceans, this is talking about all chaos, evil, and death itself. All forces of Leviathan have been extinguished and utterly annihilated. In other words:
§ He will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain anymore, for the former things have passed away.
§ In that day the Lord with his hard and great and strong sword will punish Leviathan the fleeing serpent, Leviathan the twisting serpent, and he will slay the dragon that is in the sea. (Isaiah 27:1)
§ On this mountain the Lord of hosts will make for all peoples
    a feast of rich food, a feast of well-aged wine,
    of rich food full of marrow, of aged wine well refined.
7
And he will swallow up on this mountain
    the covering that is cast over all peoples,
    the veil that is spread over all nations.
8
    He will swallow up death forever;
and the Lord God will wipe away tears from all faces,
    and the reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth,
    for the Lord has spoken
- Leviathan and the problem of Evil
○ The story of Leviathan is not about a dinosaur. Just look at all of the passages about Leviathan that we have read so far. Look at how many books of the Bible address the subject and how many authors use Leviathan imagery.
○ This is about nothing less than the cosmic battle of God against all His enemies. It is about the problem of suffering and evil. It is about why God allows cancer and disease, why He allows earthquakes and famines, why He allows rape and murder. And if you don't understand the story of Leviathan, then you won't have a thoroughly Biblical answer to suffering and death when Leviathan strikes you or someone you love.
§ God subdued these things once in creation, twice at the red sea, and thrice at Jesus' first coming. Leviathan must obey God, and it is being weeded out of the world as we speak. But now we await the ultimate return of our Savior when He will ultimately eradicate the twisting serpent, and the seas of chaos will be destroyed. Even hell and death itself will be eradicated.
§ And that is what Job 41, and indeed the entire Bible is all about. 